I'm not someone who cares about popular
culture for the sake of popular culture
but I'm someone who's very sincerely
interested in cultural production and
how changes in popular culture
correspond to the pursuit of political
change the real political significance
of American pop culture movies music and
so on it seems so obvious when we see
that culture infiltrating a foreign
society especially one in which it's
repressed or forbidden right now in Cuba
people hand around hard drives with
American pop culture downloaded from the
internet because they have no direct
access to the internet right now in
North Korea there is a black market for
American movies on CDs DVDs and so on
when I was a child before the Internet
my father told me about an article I
read in some magazine or some newspaper
describing how in Saudi Arabia
mainstream American films had a
political significance that was largely
unthought-of
by the directors actors and writers who
produced those films in the first place
so this would have been American movies
on VHS cassette I assume being shared
from person to person in Saudi Arabia
and this article my father told me said
that just seeing you know a scene in a
courtroom where a female lawyer is
yelling at a police officer seeing
American movies in which women drove
cars and made their own decisions about
their careers and their divorces and you
know seeing a dramatized depiction of
the American legal system could have
tremendous significance for people
particularly women watching those movies
in Saudi Arabia it could be a challenge
to everything they'd grown up with
everything they've been told in their
own system of education now again
there's an interesting question about
how in North Korea people perceive the
outside world in to what extent the
black market American movies significant
um these same cultural sources these
same touchstones have an
amazing significance within American
culture and yet of course it's much more
difficult to discern there isn't any
such clear and easy contrast as a
repressive regime foreign culture in a
foreign language might provide
nevertheless there's no question when
you look back at the very first of the
Star Wars movies we look back at the
very different reception of the Phantom
Menace now 20 years ago
each of these films both shaped and was
shaped by the culture that produced it
the culture that received it and so on
and I'm partly interested in these
things partly just because I'm
interested in sort of philosophical
questions of what is good writing and
what is bad writing but I'm also really
sincerely interested in the way in which
the production of culture is part and
parcel of the pursuit of political
change now most of the commentary I see
trying to ask and answer the question of
why were the Star Wars movies so
terrible or why were the game of why was
the game of Thrones
television adaptation so terrible it
tends to inflame the question in terms
of personal political power of people in
in creative and executive positions and
hubris the hubris of those people now
that story is meaningful in its own way
I understand that as a story we tell
ourselves some people want to make
George Lucas into the villain who
basically destroyed the intellectual
property that he happened to own
destroyed a series of films where really
he wasn't responsible for what was good
about the original trilogy or at the
very first film that other people should
have been given credit for that and then
we got to see what a terrible author and
director George Lucas really was in the
prequels that followed so many years
later and so on that's a reassuring sort
of story we tell ourselves but I'm here
reminded of a very different newspaper
story I read again
about youth I remember a newspaper story
dealing with the constant source of
corruption and intrigue that was the
government's control of taxis in Toronto
taxis had always been associated with
organized crime very questionable labor
unions and they're overpriced and you
know all these very strange forms of
political skullduggery and this article
just quoted people at City Hall asking
why don't we just stop regulating taxis
why don't we just let as many people who
want to have taxi licences have them and
remove this whole world of intrigue and
corruption why don't we just deregulate
taxis now decades later these questions
would be asked again as technologies on
people's cell phones like uber and lyft
ride share technology challenged the
right of a small number of taxi
companies to monopolize the small number
of licenses for who could and who
couldn't drive a taxi in this same
fundamental sense I'd like to challenge
the paradigm that is produced and
sustained dynasties of exclusive
intellectual property in American
culture we are now finally finally
coming up to the day on the calendar
when Mickey Mouse will become public
domain it's been a largely unquestioned
tradition in the British Empire
United States Canada Australia etc it's
been a largely unquestioned tradition
that intellectual property should last
for 50 years 75 years for some
extraordinary number of years from the
date of publication or from the date of
the death of the author I'd like to
challenge that assumption this video
what if Mickey Mouse had become public
domain just ten years after he first
appeared in a film or what if Mickey
Mouse became public domain just ten
years after his film earned a million
dollars let's say they put some kind of
threshold exactly what would the effect
be on American popular culture what
would the effect be today if anyone
anywhere in the world had the right to
use the concepts the intellectual
property of the original Star Wars movie
from the 1970s whether 10 years or 20
years after his first published as of
just mentioned by the 20-year mark
Phantom Menace would already be now in
the public domain and I don't even care
about the transfer of dollars and cents
involved you could have another law
requiring that you pay one percent or
five percent of the gross earned to the
original author but that you'd have the
right that it would become non-exclusive
that it would become the whole world
intellectual property most people think
of this only negatively and in a
protectionist sense most people think oh
no no if you let everyone on earth use
Mickey Mouse the idea the concept of
character then companies in China will
be able to produce their own Mickey
Mouse backpacks their own Mickey Mouse
handbags toys soon and so forth that's
really not the crucial issue here not at
all if just ten years after Walt Disney
had produced the character of Mickey
Mouse anyone could use that character
that would then create an incentive for
the Walt Disney Company to create new
characters new ideas new stories again
and again every year and the fundamental
sickness that we see playing out with
the continued exploitation of the Star
Wars franchise the rather tired old
ideas the 1970s that seemed to get worse
and worse with every reiteration other
dynasties of cinematic intellectual
property the aliens movies you know so
the first one which is called alien
without nest unbelievable to me is still
being beaten into the ground for just a
few million dollars more and sure the
whole world of comic-book adaptation
movies just imagine if the whole system
were restructured in such a way that the
fundamental financial incentive was to
truly innovate
was to truly come out with new
characters new stories and new ideas
because this whole game this whole scam
all of this skullduggery is actually
created and sustained only by government
intervention only by a legal framework
that we don't need that doesn't benefit
us as the public and I don't think it
benefits people in the creative arts
either I think that the total amount of
creativity the total amount of work and
well-paying employment for creative
people would be much greater if Walt
Disney were trying to come up with
something to replace Mickey Mouse every
ten years
if HBO had to come up with something
better to replace Game of Thrones every
ten years this is a very strange form of
subsidy the government is involved in
that ultimately only enriches dead
cultural properties not just literally
the fact that the author is may in many
cases be dead but that fundamentally
closes off narrows and silos the whole
world of cart of creative and artistic
production when we look forward to the
21st century what we really need to be
doing is looking back at the unexamined
assumptions of the 20th century
assumptions that seem to make sense in a
world dominated by newsprint but that
now really may just fetter us in a world
that increasingly exists online